De Waal formulates human understanding of animals into two extremities, one assuming a clear-cut distinction between humans and animals (anthropodenial), and one believing in a continuum (anthropomorphism). While the former makes interspecies comprehension an impossible inquiry, the later is commonly accused of generating false understandings. As interaction designers for animals, I believe we have to find a space in between, and in de Waal’s words, to think about ways in which we can recognise the differences between humans and animals while still maintain our bonds with them.  

In behavioural sciences, many would agree that anthropomorphism is something to be avoided. Modern science is founded upon the idea of objectivity, a distance between the observer and the observed. While this distance saves us from the naive projection of our perceptions to another species, it also risks a profound detachment from experience and interaction with what we study. 

For example, at the Intro class we talk about capturing animals’ instincts, which I believe allows us to look for something intrinsic and fixed among our observations. Similarly, when we define behaviour as response to particular stimuli, we can focus on what happens after the release of stimuli that we ourselves recognise and keep track of. These commitments mean in the observation process we do not have to record every single action from our animals. This offers a sense of directionality and certainty in the design process, however, it runs in tandem with the potential for us to simply extract information from animal’s experience, but at the same time detaching ourselves from it. And this is not even an escape from anthropomorphism: in this process we extract information of what we think is important. 

Thus I would argue that, while our working definition of behaviour and our decision to use ethograms are powerful tools to get started with, we need to be extremely reflexive of their consequences, and be mindful that the fluidity and uncertainty of experience itself is never a noise that is not worth recording. 

Towards the end of his essay, de Waal argues for a wider appreciation of anthropomorphism, since the human comprehension of the animal kingdom essentially starts from humans themselves. He states that an animalcentric anthropomorphism is important, as it stresses the bonds we have with animals and leaves room for sensorial engagements in the process of understanding. Nagel states that it is not important to think of “what it would be like for me to behave as a bat behaves”; what matters is “what is it like for a bat to be a bat”. Their distinctions are crucial, and I would like to think about how we can strive to think in the latter manner in the design process.

For a moment let’s turn away from hard science but attend to how the literature world deals with animals. In “The Peregrine”, J.A. Baker depicts an extreme devotion to making true observation possible: “To be recognised and accepted by a peregrine you must…Be alone. Shun the furtive oddity of man, cringe from the hostile eyes of farms. Learn to fear. To share fear is the greatest bond of all” (p.13). By doing this, he gets to observe the bird with astounding details, comprehending visions of the bird that is beyond human understanding: “Like the seafarer, the peregrine lives in a pouring away world of no attachment, a world of wakes and tilting, of sinking planes of land and water. We who are anchored and earthbound cannot envisage this freedom of the eye.” (p.35). This devotion to understanding the animal from the animal’s point of view translates into a magnificent masterpiece. To me, this goes beyond empathy, but exemplifies an attempt to connect to the entirety of the animal’s worldview. While the fruit of this translates into the aesthetics of written language in this case, what can we do as designers? Can we use our ethograms as a language, and translate our understandings and attempts into something similar?

This returns to the central question of my response: what does it mean to do interaction design when there is interspecies difference and communication barrier? I do not expect to generate an answer from this thinking exercise, but instead to be extremely reflexive of the differences we perceive, the assumptions we make about these differences, and think of how to work with these assumptions. 
